Add DEP-06: Immutable ETCD Backups (#884)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/proposals/06-immutable-etcd-backups.md

---
title: Immutable etcd Cluster Backups
dep-number: 06
creation-date: 2024-09-25
status: implementable
authors:
- "@seshachalam-yv"
- "@renormalize"
- "@ishan16696"
reviewers:
- "@etcd-druid-maintainers"
---

# DEP-06: Immutable etcd Cluster Backups

## Summary

> Currently, `etcd-druid` can provision etcd clusters and manage their lifecycle. Additionally, it enables regular backups of the etcd cluster state through the sidecar container `etcd-backup-restore`, which is deployed in each etcd pod running a member of the etcd cluster. This functionality is activated when `spec.backup` is enabled with appropriate values for an etcd cluster.

Author: Now I've improvised  the summary section

> All actors (with sufficient privileges) in the cluster where `etcd-druid` is deployed, and in the etcd clusters it provisions, have access to the `Secret` that holds the credentials used to upload snapshots of the etcd cluster state. These credentials are used by system actors and human operators—typically to perform various maintenance and recovery operations.

Author: Removed 👍

> To prevent erroneous operations by human operators during maintenance and recovery, or by misbehaving actors in the cluster - which could potentially lead to an unrecoverable restoration failure, the authors propose using write-once-read-many ([WORM](#terminology)) features offered by various cloud providers where available.

Author: Fixed

> This [WORM](#terminology) model will enhance the reliability and integrity of etcd cluster state backups created by `etcd-backup-restore` in etcd clusters managed and operated by `etcd-druid` by ensuring that the backups are [*immutable*](#terminology) for a specific period from the time they are uploaded, thereby preventing any unintended modifications.

Author: Removed 👍

> `etcd-druid` and `etcd-backup-restore` will be enhanced to achieve the same functionality currently achieved by modifying or deleting backups, but without actually modifying or deleting these backups, since they will now be immutable for a set duration. This approach eliminates the possibility of potential data loss. `etcd-druid` will provide an end-to-end solution for achieving this functionality, as relying solely on `etcd-backup-restore` is insufficient given the scope and possible approaches to achieving this.

Author: I’ve now enhanced the summary section with additional improvements.

> Additionally, handling [hibernation](#terminology) for immutable backups presents a unique challenge. When an `etcd` cluster is hibernated for a duration exceeding the immutability period of its backups, the backups may become mutable again, compromising the intended immutability guarantees and exposing the backups to accidental or malicious modifications. To address this, the authors propose a solution to maintain the immutability of snapshots during extended [hibernation](#terminology) periods.

Author: I’ve now enhanced the summary section with additional improvements.

## Terminology

> - **etcd-druid:** A controller that manages etcd clusters, including provisioning and lifecycle handling.

Author: Fixed 👍

> - **etcd-backup-restore:** A sidecar container that manages backups and restores of etcd cluster state.

Author: 👍

- **WORM (Write Once, Read Many):** A storage model where data, once written, cannot be modified or deleted until certain conditions are met.

> - **Immutability:** The property of an object being unmodifiable after creation.

Author: Fixed 👍

- **Immutability Period:** The duration for which data must remain immutable in object storage before it can be modified or deleted.
- **Bucket-Level Immutability:** A policy that applies a uniform immutability period to all objects within a bucket.

> - **Object-Level Immutability:** A policy that allows setting non-uniform immutability periods for individual objects within a bucket, providing more granular control.

Author: 👍

> - **Garbage Collection:** The process of deleting old or unnecessary snapshot data to free up storage space.

Author: I've rephrased to old snapshots instead of `unnecessary snapshot data`

- **Hibernation:** The state in which an etcd cluster is scaled down to zero replicas, effectively pausing its operations. This is typically done to save resources when the cluster is not needed for an extended period. During hibernation, the cluster's data remains intact, and it can be resumed to its previous state when required.

> ## Motivation

Author: I’ve now enhanced the Summary/Motivation section with additional improvements.

Manual intervention is quite helpful in cases where restoration fails, but there is a *glaring flaw* with this method—operators have full access to all backups: `GET`, `PUT`, and `DELETE` calls. This leaves backups vulnerable to potential erroneous operations from human operators, which could lead to a disastrous loss of backup data, which cannot be recovered from.

Ensuring the integrity and availability of etcd cluster state backups is crucial for the ability to restore an etcd cluster when it has become non-functional or inoperable. Making the backups immutable protects against any unintended or malicious modifications post-creation, thereby enhancing the overall security posture.

### Goals

- Secure backup data against unintended modifications after creation through bucket-level immutability policies with the storage providers that support such features.

> - Ensure a one-to-one mapping of functionality exists for recovery operations in special circumstances which require human operator intervention, where recovery involved direct manipulation of data in the object store.

Author: Removed the unnecessary information.

There are two types of immutability options to consider:

1. **Bucket-Level Immutability:** Applies a uniform immutability period to all objects within a bucket. This is widely supported and easier to manage across different cloud providers.
2. **Object-Level Immutability:** Applies a non-uniform immutability period to the objects in the bucket, allowing setting immutability periods on a per-object basis, offering more granular control but with increased complexity and varying support across providers.

Bucket-level immutability policies will be the focus of this proposal due to their broader support and simpler management, as mentioned in the [Non-Goals](#non-goals).

### Configuring Immutable Backups

The bucket immutability feature configures an immutability policy for a cloud storage bucket, dictating how long objects in the bucket must remain immutable. It also allows for locking the bucket's immutability policy, permanently preventing the policy from being reduced or removed.

> - **Supported by Major Providers:**

Author: Fixed

  - **Google Cloud Storage (GCS):** [Bucket Lock](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
  - **Amazon S3 (S3):** [Object Lock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)
  - **Azure Blob Storage (ABS):** [Immutable Blob Storage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-policy-configure-container-scope?tabs=azure-portal)

- **Not Supported:**

  - **OpenStack Swift**

Currently, configuring immutable buckets is not handled directly within `etcd-druid`.

> By configuring an immutability policy on your storage bucket/container, you ensure that all snapshots are stored in an immutable (WORM) state for a specified duration. This prevents snapshots from being modified or deleted until they reach the end of the immutability period.

Author: Removed the repeated occurrences.

This immutability policy can be set for a specific duration, ensuring that snapshots are not altered during this period, providing a safeguard against accidental or malicious modifications. The immutability policy configuration can be applied via cloud provider consoles, APIs, or CLI tools. Once the policy is set, it becomes an inherent protection mechanism for `etcd` backups.

Immutable buckets are configured differently depending on the consumer:

- **Large-Scale Consumers (e.g., Gardener):**

>   - Have automated the configuration of immutability for existing or new buckets, as discussed [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866).

Author: For all cloud providers offering capabilities like `compliance` or `governance` mode, these settings should be configured at the `bucket/container` level.

> https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866 - for AWS you also have to choose retention modes, right? This can be one of compliance or governance mode. Is one going to be assumed in the provider extension implementation?

Answer is that this configuration is managed within the provider extension implementation and passed via seed config.

- **Standalone Consumers of `etcd-druid`:**
  - Need to handle the immutability configuration manually using the respective cloud provider's CLI tools or console.

Detailed documentation on configuring the backup bucket for immutable etcd snapshots uploaded by `etcd-backup-restore` can be found [here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/docs/usage/enabling_immutable_snapshots.md).

### Handling of Hibernated Clusters

#### What is Hibernation?

Hibernation typically involves scaling down an etcd cluster or other resources to conserve costs or resources during inactive periods. The specific implementation and processes can vary based on the setup and tools used. However, the primary objective is to pause operations while maintaining the state for future resumption.

> When an etcd cluster is hibernated for a duration exceeding the immutability period of its backups, the backups may become mutable again (this behavior depends on the cloud provider; refer to [Comparison of Storage Provider Properties](#comparison-of-storage-provider-properties-for-bucket-level-and-object-level-immutability)). This compromises the intended immutability guarantees and may expose the backups to accidental or malicious modifications.

Author: I’ve removed the section, as it is already defined in the terminology section.

To address this issue, the authors propose a solution that maintains the immutability of snapshots during extended hibernation periods.

#### Proposed Solution: Re-uploading the Latest Snapshot

The authors propose a mechanism to periodically extend the immutability period of the latest snapshot during hibernation. This is achieved by re-uploading the latest snapshot, which resets the immutability period because the immutability countdown starts from the time of upload.

This handling of hibernated clusters is a scenario where the [etcd operator-tasks](./05-etcd-operator-tasks.md) framework can be effectively utilized. Therefore, the authors will leverage the operator tasks framework in the design of this solution.

> **Implementation Details:**

Author: I’ve adjusted the structure as per your suggestions.

> - **Introduce the `renew-snapshot` Command to `etcdbrctl`:**

Author: I’ve renamed it to `reupload-snapshot` instead of `renew-snapshot`, as it more accurately reflects the process of reuploading the latest full snapshot.

  This functionality is needed to remove old snapshots whose immutability has expired, preventing storage from growing indefinitely.

- **Update the `Etcd` CRD:**

  - Add a new field `immutability.retentionType` under `etcd.spec.backup.store` to specify the type of immutability config.

- **etcd Controller Logic:**

  - When hibernation is requested:
    - The controller removes the etcd client ports `2380` and `2379` from the `etcd-client` service, leaving only the `etcd-backup-restore` port `8080`, effectively stopping etcd client traffic.
    - The controller creates an `EtcdOperatorTask` to trigger an on-demand full snapshot.
    - The controller scales down the etcd cluster by setting `StatefulSet.spec.replicas` to zero.
    - The controller periodically creates the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` if `etcd.spec.backup.store.immutability.retentionType` is set to `"Bucket"` and based on `etcd.spec.backup.fullSnapshotSchedule`.

- **`ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` Specification:**

  - Runs `etcdbrctl renew-snapshot` to extend the immutability of the latest snapshot.

>   - Runs `etcdbrctl garbage-collect --garbage-collection-policy <policy>` to remove old snapshots.

Reviewer: do you really need another command to garbage collect?
once you have successfully uploaded a copy of the last fullsnapshot for a hibernated cluster you can also clean up the last one, right?

- **EtcdOperatorTask Controller Logic:**

>   - The operator-tasks controller reacts to the creation of the custom resource and deploys a job named `<etcd-name>-extend-immutability`, which is the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` job.

Reviewer: there is no change in the operator task controller logic. Just point to the operator task proposal instead.

  - The controller reports metrics regarding the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` job, which can be used to raise alerts for operators if immutability has not been extended.

By periodically re-uploading the latest snapshot during hibernation, the authors ensure that the immutability period is extended, and the backups remain **protected throughout the hibernation period**.

## Compatibility

The proposed changes are fully compatible with existing etcd clusters and backup processes.

- **Backward Compatibility:**
  - Existing clusters without immutable buckets will continue to function without change.

>   - The introduction of the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` does not affect clusters that are not hibernated.

Reviewer: how is this point relevant for ensuring compatibility? The task will be created only if immutability is turned on and its type is `Bucket`. So it is but obvious that this task will not do anything for non-hibernated clusters as it will never be created.

- **Forward Compatibility:**

>   - Clusters can opt-in to use immutable backups by configuring the bucket accordingly.

Reviewer: Is this true in gardener case? The bucket is shared across all shoot clusters in the seed. So there is no opt-in at the cluster level, right?
Also the opt-in is complete only when buckers are configured with immutability policy turned on and ETCD resource is configured to enable immutability for its backups.

>   - The controller's logic to handle hibernation is additive and does not interfere with existing workflows.

Reviewer: which controller?

Author: It’s etcd-controller; I’ve updated it accordingly.

## Risks and Mitigations

- **Increased Storage Costs:**

>   - **Risk:** Copying snapshots or frequent snapshots may lead to increased storage usage.

Reviewer: There are 2 things that you mention here -> `copying snapshots` and `frequent snapshots`. The latter is not part of this proposal and therefore not a risk to be mentioned here. To be honest there is no additional storage cost. If the cluster was not hibernated you will anyways take one full snapshot per 24 hrs (default). So when the cluster is hibernated then you only have a cost of single additional copy of the full snapshot at any given point in time. Perhaps it would be nice if you give some cost numbers to back your claim that the cost of one additional full snapshot is minimal. 
Compute the cost assuming the largest possible full snapshot that you might have to maintain an additional copy of.

Author: I’ve removed the entire section, Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers, and restructured and enhanced it as part of the earlier section of the proposal.

  - **Mitigation:** Since only the latest full snapshot is copied, the additional storage usage is minimal. Garbage collection helps manage storage utilization.

- **Operational Complexity:**

>   - **Risk:** Introducing new resources and processes might add complexity.

Reviewer: add complexity to what? Can you rephrase this?

  - **Mitigation:** The processes are automated within the controller, requiring minimal operator intervention. Clear documentation and tooling support will help manage complexity.

- **Failed Snapshot Before Hibernation:**
  - **Risk:** Failure to take a full snapshot before hibernation could delay the hibernation process and potentially compromise data integrity.

>     - **Mitigation:** Implement robust error handling and retry mechanisms to ensure snapshots are taken successfully before hibernation. Notify operators of any failures by updating the `etcd.status.lastErrors` and `etcd.status.lastOperation` fields. Additionally, operators can leverage the metrics provided by `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask`, which follows the [operator task framework](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/05-etcd-operator-tasks.md#metrics), to trigger alerts. This ensures timely intervention and resolution of issues, maintaining the integrity and availability of the etcd cluster state.

Reviewer: The risk mentioned is failure to take a full snapshot prior to hibernation. But in the mitigation you are also talking about ` ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` which only comes into play post hibernation which automatically means that the full snapshot was taken successfully, right?

Author: I’ve removed the entire section, Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers, and restructured and enhanced it as part of the earlier section of the proposal.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: These are not alternatives actually. The section that compares object-level vs bucket level immutability policy should be moved when you start to define the proposal and not moved to the bottom.

From my perspective the approach to implement immutability is a 2 step process. We start with bucket level in iteration-1 and move to object-level immutability in iteration-2. Therefore this becomes part of the proposal and not mentioned as an alternative.

1. **Bucket-Level Immutability Policies:**
   - **Applies Uniformly:** Applies a uniform immutability period to all objects within a bucket.
   - **Immutable Objects:** Once set, objects cannot be modified or deleted until the immutability period expires.
   - **Simplified Management:** Simplifies management by applying the same policy to all objects.

2. **Object-Level Immutability Policies:**
   - **Granular Control:** Allows setting immutability periods on a per-object basis.
   - **Flexible Immutability Durations:** Offers granular control, enabling different immutability durations for individual objects.
   - **Varying Requirements:** Can accommodate varying immutability requirements for different types of backups.

#### Considerations for Object-Level Immutability

Using object-level immutability provides flexibility in scenarios where certain backups require different immutability periods. However, current limitations and complexities make it less practical for immediate implementation.

> - Enabling object-level immutability requires bucket-level immutability to be set first (applicable in S3 and ABS). In GCS, the capability to enable object-level immutability on an existing bucket is not available.

Reviewer: Can you please also mention the plan/date by which GCS is going to enable object level immutability. If there is an issue open please provide a link here.

Author: Updated

**Advantages:**

- **Granular Control:** Allows setting different immutability periods for different objects.
- **Efficient Resource Utilization:** Prevents unnecessary extension of immutability for all objects.
- **Enhanced Flexibility:** Adjust immutability periods as needed.

**Disadvantages:**

> - **Provider Limitations:** Enabling object-level immutability on existing buckets is not universally supported.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on this point a bit more? What is not universal?

Author: I’ve removed the entire section, *Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers*, and restructured and enhanced it as part of the earlier section of the proposal.

> - **Increased Complexity:** Requires additional logic in backup processes and tooling.

Reviewer: What is the increase in complexity as compared to what we are already introducing for bucket level immutability policies?

Author: I’ve removed the entire section, *Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers*, and restructured and enhanced it as part of the earlier section of the proposal.

> - **Prerequisites:** Some providers require bucket-level immutability to be set first.

Reviewer: why is this a con?

Author: I’ve removed the entire section, *Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers*, and restructured and enhanced it as part of the earlier section of the proposal.

---
title: Immutable etcd Cluster Backups
dep-number: 06
creation-date: 2024-09-25

> status: implementable

Author: Yes, the proposal includes handling hibernated clusters.  

> I'm a but confused, since the non-goals section mentions that the proposal doesn't focus on handling immutable backups for hibernated clusters 

Currently, `etcd-druid` does not differentiate between a temporary scale-down of replicas and an intentional long-term scale-down for hibernation. In other words, there is no clear signal to indicate hibernation intent, as mentioned in [[gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922)](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922).  

As part of this proposal, implementing [[gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922)](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922) is **out of scope**.  

However, the proposal assumes that a clear signal for hibernation—whether through an annotation, spec change, or another mechanism.

> status: implementable

Reviewer 2: I still believe setting etcd spec.replicas to 0 is intent to hibernate the cluster. In the case of quorum loss handling, we don't scale down the etcd spec.replicas, but rather set the Etcd to be ignored and instead scale down the sts spec.replicas, which is entirely different.

> status: implementable

Author: Providing a mechanism to signal hibernation intent is out of scope for this PR. As discussed offline, I've rephrased the non-goal section accordingly.

To answer the original question:
> Is the proposed feature just immutable backups, or does it also include handling hibernated clusters?

Yes, the proposal also includes handling hibernated clusters. This functionality is not yet implemented, which is why the status is marked as `implementable`.

authors:
- "@seshachalam-yv"

> - "@renormalize"
> - "@ishan16696"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Since the DEP has changed significantly since the original draft, and the both of us have only acted as reviewers after the first draft, it is not right to have our names in the author section.

## Motivation

`etcd-druid` provisions etcd clusters and manages their lifecycle. For every etcd cluster, consumers can enable periodic backups of the cluster state by configuring the `spec.backup` section in an Etcd custom resource. Periodic backups are taken via the `etcd-backup-restore` sidecar container that runs in each etcd member pod.

Periodic backups of an etcd cluster state ensure the ability to recover from a complete quorum loss, enhancing reliability and fault tolerance. It is crucial that these backups, which are vital for restoring the etcd cluster, remain protected from any form of tampering, whether intentional or accidental. To safeguard the integrity of these backups, the authors recommend utilizing `WORM` protection, a feature offered by various cloud providers, to ensure the backups remain immutable and secure.

### Goals

- Protect backup data against modifications and deletions post-creation through immutability policies offered by storage providers.

### Non-Goals

> - Implementing hibernation support via `etcd.spec` or annotations on the `Etcd` CR (i.e., specifying an intent for hibernation), as noted in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922).

Author: >This is more in-line with this proposal's theme, ie immutable backups. Whereas, the issue you mentioned here simply talks about providing certain features upon hibernation of the etcd cluster, which is a general feature and not necessarily related to immutable backups.

Actually, the issue I mentioned proposes that **hibernation and wake-up from hibernation be offered as functionalities directly in `etcd-druid`**, making them available both within and outside the Gardener context. 

>This issue proposes that hibernation and wake-up from hibernation be offered as functionalities directly in etcd-druid which can be used in and outside of gardener context. The consumer can mark an etcd-cluster to be hibernated and watch the Etcd.Status to know the status of hibernation. The steps that are done in order to hibernate a cluster are determined based on the Etcd resource itself.

While the proposal focuses on **immutable backups**, the referenced issue is relevant because it lays the groundwork for providing a clear hibernation signal in `etcd-druid`, which is necessary for correctly handling immutability extensions during hibernation. 

That's why I've included it as a non-goal—implementing this issue is explicitly out of scope for this proposal.

> - Implementing hibernation support via `etcd.spec` or annotations on the `Etcd` CR (i.e., specifying an intent for hibernation), as noted in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922).

Reviewer 2: The issue talks about a lot of other features to be implemented as part of handling hibernation, correct. That's the reason I would like this non-goal point here to be re-worded to something more focused towards specifically handling immutable backups upon hibernation of the etcd cluster, rather than just a blanket statement about not handling hibernation of etcd clusters.

> - Implementing hibernation support via `etcd.spec` or annotations on the `Etcd` CR (i.e., specifying an intent for hibernation), as noted in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922).

Author: Rephrased https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/b1af993567515bc97444150324c6362ebfb773b4

- Supporting immutable backups on storage providers that do not offer immutability features (e.g., OpenStack Swift).

## Proposal

This proposal aims to improve backup storage integrity and security by using immutability features available on major cloud providers.

### Supported Cloud Providers

- **Google Cloud Storage (GCS):** [Bucket Lock](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
- **Amazon S3 (S3):** [Object Lock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)

> - **Azure Blob Storage (ABS):** [Immutable Blob Storage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-policy-configure-container-scope?tabs=azure-portal)

Author: Added

#### Types of Immutability

1. **Object-Level Immutability:** Allows setting immutability periods independently for each object within a bucket.
2. **Bucket-Level Immutability:** Applies a uniform immutability policy to all objects in a bucket.

> ### Comparison of Bucket-Level and Object-Level Immutability

Reviewer 2: That talks about object-level immutability. I'm talking about mentioning support for adding bucket-level immutability for existing and new buckets, which isn't mentioned in the table currently

> ### Comparison of Bucket-Level and Object-Level Immutability

Author: Fixed as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/b1af993567515bc97444150324c6362ebfb773b4

### Configuring Immutable Backups

Currently, `etcd-druid` does not directly configure immutable buckets. The specific method of enabling immutability depends on your use case:

- **Large-Scale Consumers (e.g., Gardener):**  
  Typically, these consumers automate the configuration of immutability for both existing and new buckets, as detailed [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866).

- **Standalone Consumers of `etcd-druid`:**  
  These users must manually configure immutability settings using their cloud provider's CLI, SDK, or web console.

#### Prerequisites

1. **Configure or Update the Immutable Bucket**  
   - Use your cloud provider’s CLI, SDK, or console to create (or update) a bucket/container with a WORM (write-once-read-many) immutability policy.  
   - Refer to the [Getting Started guide](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/docs/usage/enabling_immutable_snapshots.md#configure-bucket-level-immutability) for step-by-step instructions on configuring or updating the immutable bucket across different cloud providers.

>    - For AWS S3, for example, you enable Object Lock at bucket creation; for Azure Blob Storage, you configure Immutable Blob Storage at the container scope.

Author: Removed.

>    - For AWS S3, for example, you enable Object Lock at bucket creation; for Azure Blob Storage, you configure Immutable Blob Storage at the container scope.

Author: Removed

2. **Set `Etcd.spec.backup.store` to Reference This Bucket**  

>    - In the `Etcd` custom resource (CR), specify the `store` configuration (e.g., `spec.backup.store`) to point to the bucket name you configured above.

Author: Yes, Added the sample yaml

3. **Provide Valid Credentials in a Kubernetes Secret**  
   - The `store` section of the `Etcd` CR must reference a `Secret` containing valid credentials.  
   - Confirm that this secret has the proper permissions to upload and retrieve snapshots from the immutable bucket.  
   - See the [Getting Started guide](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/deployment/getting-started-locally/getting-started-locally.md#setting-up-cloud-provider-object-store-secret) for an example.

4. **(Gardener Only) Credential Rotation**  

>    - **Note**: In Gardener-based setups, credential rotation is automatically handled by `gardener/gardener`. No manual rotation is required.  

Author: I've removed the bullet point since Gardener does not handle cloud provider credential rotation for the seed bucket, as stated [[here](https://gardener.cloud/docs/getting-started/features/credential-rotation/#user-provided-credentials)](https://gardener.cloud/docs/getting-started/features/credential-rotation/#user-provided-credentials).

Credential rotation must be managed by the operator, so I've added the following note:  

> [!NOTE]  
> `etcd-druid` does not handle cloud provider credential rotation. It is the responsibility of the operator to manage credential rotation.

   - In non-Gardener environments, you must manage credential updates and secret rotation yourself.

By following these steps, you will have set up an immutable bucket for storing etcd backups, along with the necessary references in your `Etcd` specification and Kubernetes secret.

### Handling of Hibernated Clusters

When an etcd cluster is hibernated for a period longer than the bucket’s immutability period, backups might become mutable again (depending on the cloud provider, see [Comparison of Storage Provider Properties](#comparison-of-bucket-level-and-object-level-immutability)). This possibility undermines the intended guarantees of immutability and may expose backups to accidental or malicious alterations.

As mentioned in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922), a clear hibernation signal is needed. Since hibernation is not yet supported in `etcd-druid` and is out of scope for this proposal, we only address the method for maintaining immutability.

#### Proposal

To mitigate the risk of backups becoming mutable during extended hibernation under bucket-level immutability, the authors propose the following approach:

> 1. **Prerequisite: Take a Final Full Snapshot Before Hibernation**  

Reviewer: To ensure that there is no data loss, one must cut-off traffic to etcd before taking a full snapshot. This is then followed by hibernation of an etcd cluster. This you have also mentioned in `etcd Controller Enhancements` section below but in summarising the approach this is missed.

>    - Before scaling the etcd cluster down to zero replicas, the etcd controller triggers an [on-demand full snapshot](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/05-etcd-operator-tasks.md#trigger-on-demand-fulldelta-snapshot). This ensures that the latest state of the etcd cluster is captured and securely stored before hibernation commences.

Reviewer: We also discussed that it is possible that the full snapshot taken prior to hibernation gets corrupted. Then you stand a chance to lose data for at least 24 hours. In addition the full snapshot prior to the one that you are about to take will become mutable after some time. So now you get into a situation where the final full snapshot is corrupt and the one prior to that is mutable and therefore susceptible to modifications. Should we mention this gap?

Author: Yes, I've added it as limitation.

2. **Periodically Re-Upload the Snapshot**  
   - Re-uploading the latest full snapshot resets its immutability period in the bucket, thereby keeping the backups protected during hibernation.  
   - By default, the re-upload schedule is determined by `etcd.spec.backup.fullSnapshotSchedule`. At present, this interval cannot be customized exclusively for re-uploads; future enhancements may introduce a dedicated configuration parameter.  
   - A new operator task type, `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`, will periodically invoke the `reupload-snapshot` and `garbage-collect` commands.

3. **Enhance `etcd-backup-restore`**  
   - Introduce new CLI commands:
     - **`reupload-snapshot`** for re-uploading snapshots.  

>      - **`garbage-collect`** for removing older backups whose immutability period has expired.

Author: We initially proposed removing old snapshots to optimize storage usage, but I've now updated the proposal **not** to remove them.  

- **`ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` also manages garbage collection**, ensuring that **only the latest immutable snapshots are retained** while deleting older snapshots created by the task itself. This prevents unnecessary accumulation of expired snapshots while maintaining immutability.  

For reference, the updated changes can be seen [[here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/files#diff-981f3bcbeed277184597de9af59f3e40fa0c76a43f84c739a0d17fd3948d2f8aR146)](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/files#diff-981f3bcbeed277184597de9af59f3e40fa0c76a43f84c739a0d17fd3948d2f8aR146).

By capturing a final full snapshot before hibernation, periodically re-uploading it to preserve immutability, and removing stale backups, etcd backups remain safeguarded against accidental or malicious alterations until the cluster is resumed.

> ##### ETCD API Changes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Etcd CR API Changes
```

A new field is introduced in `Etcd.spec.backup.store` to indicate the immutability strategy:

```go
// StoreSpec defines parameters for storing etcd backups.
type StoreSpec struct {
    // ...
    // Immutability configuration for the backup store.
    Immutability *ImmutabilitySpec `json:"immutability,omitempty"`
}

// ImmutabilitySpec defines immutability settings.
type ImmutabilitySpec struct {
    // RetentionType indicates the type of immutability approach. For example, "Bucket".
    RetentionType string `json:"retentionType,omitempty"`
}
```

> If `immutability` is not specified, `etcd-druid` will assume that the bucket is mutable, and no immutability-related logic applies.

Reviewer: Just add a line saying that we have defined a new type to allow us future enhancements to the immutability specification.

Author: Done

##### `etcd-backup-restore` Enhancements

The authors propose adding two new commands to the `etcd-backup-restore` CLI (`etcdbrctl`) to maintain immutability during hibernation and to clean up older snapshots:

1. **`reupload-snapshot`**
   - Downloads the latest full snapshot from the object store.
   - Renames the snapshot (for instance, updates its Unix timestamp) to avoid overwriting an existing immutable snapshot.

>    - Uploads the renamed snapshot back to object storage, thereby restarting its immutability timer.

Reviewer: you should also mention that if a bucket is shared across several etcd clusters then this enhancement would increase the storage cost and perhaps some numbers would be nice.

>    - Uploads the renamed snapshot back to object storage, thereby restarting its immutability timer.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be more optimal to utilise provider APIs to perform a server-side copy of the object with a new name? That we we save on download+upload time as well as network costs.

Author: > Wouldn't it be more optimal to utilise provider APIs to perform a server-side copy of the object with a new name? That we we save on download+upload time as well as network costs.

Currently, `etcd-backup-restore` supports listing snapshots, finding the latest snapshot, and using store.Save. However, it does not currently provide functionality to perform a provider API server-side copy without downloading the actual snapshot. This is definitely something we will consider during implementation.

>If so, can we rename this to renew-snapshot rather than reupload-snapshot? Because the task is to renew or refresh the snapshot's timestamp, rather than download+upload.

I've now renamed it to `extend-snapshot-immutability` to better reflect its purpose—maintaining immutability during hibernation and cleaning up snapshots created by `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`.

Reviewer 2: > However, it does not currently provide functionality to perform a provider API server-side copy without downloading the actual snapshot. This is definitely something we will consider during implementation.

That's the reason I would not want you to explicitly mention in the proposal about the method of extending snapshot immutability, or atleast mention the option of using provider APIs to perform server-side object copy. I would not want this option to get lost in PR discussion, and would like it to be documented in the proposal as a possible option. WDYT?

Author: Added a note for using server-side APIs to copy objects as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/b1af993567515bc97444150324c6362ebfb773b4

2. **`garbage-collect`**

>    - Scans the object store for older snapshots and deletes them if their immutability period has expired and they are no longer needed, following the standard [garbage collection policy](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/docs/usage/garbage_collection.md).

Author: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1937396609

##### etcd Controller Enhancements

When a hibernation flow is initiated (by external tooling or higher-level operators), the [etcd controller](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/development/controllers.md#etcd-controller) can:

1. Remove etcd’s client ports (2379/2380) from the etcd Service to block application traffic.
2. Trigger an [on-demand full snapshot](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/05-etcd-operator-tasks.md#trigger-on-demand-fulldelta-snapshot) via an `EtcdOperatorTask`.
3. Scale down the `StatefulSet` replicas to zero, provided the previous snapshot step is successful.
4. Create the `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` if `etcd.spec.backup.store.immutability.retentionType` is `"Bucket"` and based on `etcd.spec.backup.fullSnapshotSchedule`.

##### Operator Task Enhancements

> The `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` will create a cron job that:

Reviewer: what you have missed is that this task should only be active as long as the cluster is hibernated. Once the etcd cluster comes out of hibernation then this task should no longer exist. So have a section on lifecycle of this task.

Author: Yes, Added the lifecycle as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/6e4511a5afcb65ebe8ef391826b7ec1769411853#diff-981f3bcbeed277184597de9af59f3e40fa0c76a43f84c739a0d17fd3948d2f8aR206-R219

- Runs `etcdbrctl reupload-snapshot` to extend the immutability of the most recent snapshot.
- Runs `etcdbrctl garbage-collect --garbage-collection-policy <policy>` to remove old snapshots.

By periodically re-uploading the latest snapshot during hibernation, the authors ensure that the immutability period is extended, and the backups remain **protected throughout the hibernation period**.

###### Example Task Config

```go

> type ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTaskConfig struct {

Reviewer: So one task is extending the snapshot's immutability and also doing garbage collection? If that is the case then the name does not reflect that.

Author: Now, I've removed the garbage collection config and **`ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` will automatically garbage collect** the snapshots it has created, ensuring storage efficiency and preventing stale backups.

  // Schedule defines a cron schedule (e.g., "0 */6 * * *").
  Schedule *string `json:"schedule,omitempty"`

  // GarbageCollectionConfig specifies the configuration for snapshot GC.
  GarbageCollectionConfig *GarbageCollectionConfig `json:"garbageCollectionConfig,omitempty"`
}

> type GarbageCollectionConfig struct {

Reviewer: i did not quite understand this type in context of `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTaskConfig` - why is it that complicated? If GC needs to be done via this task as well then it should only be done for copied last full snapshot (taken prior to hibernation). I am confused why is delta snapshot retention coming here and what is exponential GC policy and how is relevant w.r.t this task.

Author: Now, I've removed the garbage collection config and ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask will automatically garbage collect the snapshots it has created, ensuring storage efficiency and preventing stale backups.

  // GarbageCollectionPolicy (e.g., "LimitBased" or "Exponential").
  GarbageCollectionPolicy *string `json:"garbageCollectionPolicy,omitempty"`
  // MaxBackupsLimitBasedGC sets the maximum number of full snapshots to keep.
  MaxBackupsLimitBasedGC *int32 `json:"maxBackupsLimitBasedGC,omitempty"`
  // DeltaSnapshotRetentionPeriod indicates how long to keep delta snapshots (e.g., "72h").
  DeltaSnapshotRetentionPeriod *metav1.Duration `json:"deltaSnapshotRetentionPeriod,omitempty"`
}
```

**Sample YAML**:

```yaml
spec:
  config:

>     schedule: "0 */6 * * *"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    schedule: "0 0 * * *"
```
Since the snapshot is to be daily, and not every 6 hours; it's better to have this as the example.

    garbageCollectionConfig:
      garbageCollectionPolicy: "LimitBased"
      maxBackupsLimitBasedGC: 5
      deltaSnapshotRetentionPeriod: "72h"
```

## Compatibility

These changes are compatible with existing etcd clusters and current backup processes.

> - **Backward Compatibility:**

Reviewer 2: What about reverting from immutable backups to mutable backups? Is that possible? If so, can you please elaborate on the nuances of this? If not, then can you add that as a limitation here?

Author: Yes, added a section for disabling the immutability [here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/6e4511a5afcb65ebe8ef391826b7ec1769411853#diff-981f3bcbeed277184597de9af59f3e40fa0c76a43f84c739a0d17fd3948d2f8aR253-R263)

- **Forward Compatibility:**
  - Clusters can opt in to use immutable backups by configuring the bucket accordingly (as described in [Configuring Immutable Backups](#configuring-immutable-backups)) and setting `etcd.spec.backup.store.immutability.retentionType == "Bucket"`.
  - The enhanced hibernation logic in the etcd controller is additive, meaning it does not interfere with existing workflows.

### Impact for Operators

In scenarios where you want to exclude certain snapshots from an etcd restore, you previously could simply delete them from object storage. However, when bucket-level immutability is enabled, deleting existing immutable snapshots is no longer possible. To address this need, most cloud providers allow adding **custom annotations or tags** to objects—even immutable ones—so they can be logically excluded without physically removing them.

`etcd-backup-restore` supports ignoring snapshots based on annotations or tags, rather than deleting them. Operators can add the following key-value pair to any snapshot object to exclude it from future restores:

- **Key:** `x-etcd-snapshot-exclude`  
- **Value:** `true`  

> Because these tags or annotations do not modify the underlying snapshot data, they are permissible even for immutable objects. Once these annotations are in place, `etcd-backup-restore` will detect them and skip the tagged snapshots during restoration, thus preventing unwanted snapshots from being used. For more details, see the [Ignoring Snapshots during Restoration](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/docs/usage/enabling_immutable_snapshots.md#ignoring-snapshots-during-restoration).

Reviewer 2: Please add a `limitation` note for AWS, since we currently don't support this for S3 buckets, atleast at the time of writing this proposal.

Author: Added [here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/6e4511a5afcb65ebe8ef391826b7ec1769411853#diff-981f3bcbeed277184597de9af59f3e40fa0c76a43f84c739a0d17fd3948d2f8aR285-R287)

Reviewer 2: Thank you

## Motivation

`etcd-druid` provisions etcd clusters and manages their lifecycle. For every etcd cluster, consumers can enable periodic backups of the cluster state by configuring the `spec.backup` section in an Etcd custom resource. Periodic backups are taken via the `etcd-backup-restore` sidecar container that runs in each etcd member pod.

Periodic backups of an etcd cluster state ensure the ability to recover from a data loss or a quorum loss, enhancing reliability and fault tolerance. It is crucial that these backups, which are vital for restoring the etcd cluster, remain protected from any form of tampering, whether intentional or accidental. To safeguard the integrity of these backups, the authors recommend utilizing `WORM` protection, a feature offered by various cloud providers, to ensure the backups remain immutable and secure.

### Goals

- Protect backup data against modifications and deletions post-creation through immutability policies offered by storage providers.

### Non-Goals

> - Implementing a mechanism to signal hibernation intent, such as adding functionality via `etcd.spec` or annotations on the `Etcd` CR, to indicate when an etcd cluster should enter or exit hibernation, as discussed in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Implementing a mechanism to signal hibernation intent for handling immutability of hibernated etcd clusters, such as adding functionality via `etcd.spec` or annotations on the `Etcd` CR, to indicate when an etcd cluster should enter or exit hibernation, as discussed in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922).
```

> [!NOTE]
> In AWS S3, it is possible to increase and decrease the bucket-level immutability period; however, this action can be blocked by configuring specific bucket policy settings.  
> For GCS, object-level immutability is not yet supported for existing buckets; see [this issue](https://issuetracker.google.com/issues/346679415?pli=1).

### Recommended Approach

At the time of writing this proposal, these are the current limitations seen across providers:

- **S3 and ABS:** typically require bucket-level immutability as a prerequisite for object-level immutability.
- **GCS** does not currently support object-level immutability in existing buckets.
- **ABS** requires a [migration process](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-version-level-worm-policies#migration) to enable version-level immutability on existing containers.

Consequently, the authors recommend **bucket-level immutability**. This approach simplifies configuration and ensures a uniform immutability policy for all backups in a bucket across all support providers.

### Configuring Immutable Backups

> Creating and configuring immutable buckets on providers is not handled by `etcd-druid` and must be done by the consumers. For a large-scale consumer like Gardener, provider extensions are leveraged to automate both the creation and configuration of buckets. For more details, see BackupBucket and refer to [this issue](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating and configuring immutable buckets on providers is not handled by `etcd-druid` and must be done by the consumers. For a large-scale consumer like Gardener, provider extensions are leveraged to automate both the creation and configuration of buckets. For more details, see [BackupBucket](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/75dd7c7488b31d87dc8c683f8ed2ef6aaa12d283/docs/extensions/resources/backupbucket.md) and refer to [this issue](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866).
```

> [!NOTE]
> The `etcd-druid` does not handle the rotation of cloud provider credentials. Credential rotation must be managed by the operator.

By following these steps, you will have set up an immutable bucket for storing etcd backups, along with the necessary references in your `Etcd` specification and Kubernetes secret.

### Handling of Hibernated Clusters

When an etcd cluster remains hibernated beyond the bucket’s immutability period, backups might become mutable again, depending on the cloud provider (see [Comparison of Storage Provider Properties](#comparison-of-bucket-level-and-object-level-immutability)). This could compromise the intended guarantees of immutability, exposing backups to accidental or malicious alterations.

As mentioned in [gardener/etcd-druid#922](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/922), a clear hibernation signal is needed. Since `etcd-druid` does not currently support hibernation natively and addressing that is out of scope for this proposal, we focus solely on maintaining immutability.

#### Proposal  

> To mitigate the risk of backups becoming mutable during extended hibernation under bucket-level immutability, the authors propose the following approach:

Author: Here, we are referring to the bucket-level immutability type—the approach recommended by the authors.

   - Before scaling the etcd cluster down to zero replicas, the etcd controller removes etcd’s client ports (2379/2380) from the etcd Service to block application traffic.
   - The etcd controller then triggers an [on-demand full snapshot](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/05-etcd-operator-tasks.md#trigger-on-demand-fulldelta-snapshot). This ensures that the latest state of the etcd cluster is captured and securely stored before hibernation begins.  

2. **Periodically Re-Upload the Snapshot**  
   - Re-uploading the latest full snapshot resets its immutability period in the bucket, ensuring backups remain protected during hibernation.  
   - By default, the re-upload schedule follows `etcd.spec.backup.fullSnapshotSchedule`. Currently, this interval cannot be customized exclusively for re-uploads; future enhancements may introduce a dedicated configuration parameter.  
   - A new operator task type, **`ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`**, periodically calls a new CLI command, `extend-snapshot-immutability`, to re-upload the snapshot and extend its immutability.  

>    - **`ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` also manages garbage collection**, ensuring that **only the latest immutable snapshots are retained** while deleting older snapshots created by the task itself.

Author: Proposed garbage collection (GC) mechanism targets only the snapshots that are created by the `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` during hibernation. In long-hibernated clusters, repeated re-uploads would otherwise generate multiple duplicate snapshots. The GC process is designed to delete these duplicates—specifically, it removes the older re-uploaded snapshots (or those that become mutable), ensuring that only the most recent snapshot is retained.

This approach does not interfere with the standard GC policy that runs when the cluster awakens, nor does it affect snapshots created during normal operation. It’s intended solely to prevent the accumulation of redundant snapshots during hibernation, which could otherwise lead to confusion and clutter in the backup store.

>    - **`ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` also manages garbage collection**, ensuring that **only the latest immutable snapshots are retained** while deleting older snapshots created by the task itself.

Reviewer 4: ok, got it. thanks

type StoreSpec struct {
    // ...
    // Immutability configuration for the backup store.
    Immutability *ImmutabilitySpec `json:"immutability,omitempty"`
}

// ImmutabilitySpec defines immutability settings.
type ImmutabilitySpec struct {
    // RetentionType indicates the type of immutability approach. For example, "bucket".
    RetentionType string `json:"retentionType,omitempty"`
}
```

If `immutability` is not specified, `etcd-druid` will assume that the bucket is mutable, and no immutability-related logic applies. We have defined a new type to allow us future enhancements to the immutability specification.

##### `etcd-backup-restore` Enhancements

The authors propose adding new commands to the `etcd-backup-restore` CLI (`etcdbrctl`) to maintain immutability during hibernation and to clean up snapshots created by `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`:

- **`extend-snapshot-immutability`**
  - Downloads the latest full snapshot from the object store.
  - Renames the snapshot (for instance, updates its Unix timestamp) to avoid overwriting an existing immutable snapshot.
  - Uploads the renamed snapshot back to object storage, thereby **restarting** its immutability timer.  

>   - Introduces the `--gc-from-timestamp=<timestamp>` parameter, allowing users to specify a starting point from which garbage collection should be performed.

Author: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1939204453

>   - Introduces the `--gc-from-timestamp=<timestamp>` parameter, allowing users to specify a starting point from which garbage collection should be performed.

Reviewer 4: can you mention here as a note that it only GC the snapshot uploaded by task opertor, it will not consider the snapshot uploaded by etcdbr in GC.

>   - Introduces the `--gc-from-timestamp=<timestamp>` parameter, allowing users to specify a starting point from which garbage collection should be performed.

Author: Yes, updated as part of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884/commits/d96e0ead5ca0d9231fb0c56c807bb2433f3633bd

> >As an alternative to the download/upload approach, the authors document the possibility of using provider APIs to perform a server-side object copy. This method could significantly reduce network costs and latency by directly copying the snapshot within the cloud provider's infrastructure. While this option is not implemented in the current version, let's explore its feasibility for adoption in etcd-backup-restore to enable server-side copying in [snapstore](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/pkg/types/snapstore.go#L74-L86) during implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>As an alternative to the download/upload approach, the authors document the possibility of using provider APIs to perform a server-side object copy. This method could significantly reduce network costs and latency by directly copying the snapshot within the cloud provider's infrastructure. While this option is not implemented in the current version, feasibility of server-side copy can be explored in [etcd-backup-restore](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/pkg/types/snapstore.go#L74-L86) during implementation.
```

- Runs `etcdbrctl extend-snapshot-immutability --gc-from-timestamp=<creation timestamp of task>` to preserve the immutability period of the most recent snapshot. This command re-uploads the latest snapshot, effectively resetting its immutability period. Additionally, it removes any snapshots that have become mutable after the creation timestamp of the task.

By periodically re-uploading (extending) the latest snapshot during hibernation, the authors ensure that the immutability period is extended, and the backups remain **protected throughout the hibernation period**.

###### Lifecycle of `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`

The `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` is **active during hibernation** and is automatically managed by the `etcd-controller`. Its lifecycle is tied to the cluster’s hibernation state:

1. **Task Creation**  
   - When the etcd cluster enters hibernation (e.g., scaling down to zero replicas), the etcd controller:  
     - Triggers a final full snapshot.  
     - Creates the `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` to run `extend-snapshot-immutability --gc-from-timestamp=<creation timestamp of this task>` 

2. **Task Deletion**  

>    - When the cluster resumes from hibernation (scales up to non-zero replicas), the controller:  

Reviewer: another trigger is when etcd spec is updated and immutability configuration is removed. This is when you will have to also delete this task, right?

   - **`ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` also manages garbage collection**, ensuring that **only the latest immutable snapshots are retained** while deleting older snapshots created by the task itself.

By capturing a final full snapshot before hibernation, periodically re-uploading it to preserve immutability, and removing stale backups, etcd backups remain safeguarded against accidental or malicious alterations until the cluster is resumed.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Limitation:** A possible edge case exists where a snapshot may be corrupted **before hibernation** or during the **re-upload process by `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`**. If this occurs, the process may repeatedly re-upload the same corrupted snapshot, failing to provide a reliable backup.  

A potential alternative solution is to perform [compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md), which would:  

1. Start an embedded etcd instance.  
2. Perform a compaction operation.  

> 3. Take a fresh snapshot and re-upload it.  

Author: I've update it.

###### Lifecycle of `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`

The `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` is **active during hibernation** and is automatically managed by the `etcd-controller`. Its lifecycle is tied to the cluster’s hibernation state:

1. **Task Creation**  
   - When the etcd cluster enters hibernation (e.g., scaling down to zero replicas), the etcd controller:  
     - Triggers a final full snapshot.  
     - Creates the `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` to run `extend-snapshot-immutability --gc-from-timestamp=<creation timestamp of this task>` 

2. **Task Deletion**  
   - When the cluster resumes from hibernation (scales up to non-zero replicas), the controller:  
     - Deletes the `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask` to stop extending snapshots.  
     - Resumes the normal backup schedule defined in `spec.backup.fullSnapshotSchedule`.  

###### Example Task Config

```go
type ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTaskConfig struct {
  // Schedule defines a cron schedule (e.g., "0 */6 * * *").
  Schedule *string `json:"schedule,omitempty"`
}
```

**Sample YAML**:

```yaml
spec:
  config:

>     schedule: "0 0 * * *"

Author: I've changed it in example.

```

##### Disabling Immutability

If you remove the immutability configuration from `etcd.spec.backup.store`, hibernation-based immutability support no longer applies. However, once the bucket itself is locked at the provider level, **it cannot be reverted to a mutable state**. Any objects uploaded by `etcd-backup-restore` are still subject to the existing WORM policy.

If you genuinely require a mutable backup again, the recommended approach is:
1. **Use a new bucket.** In your `Etcd` custom resource, reference a different bucket that does **not** have immutability enabled.  
2. **Reconcile the `Etcd` CR.** After pointing `etcd.spec.backup.store` to the new bucket, `etcd-druid` will start storing backups there.

> **Note:** Existing snapshots in the old immutable bucket remain locked according to the configured immutability period.

> 

Author: Yes, I agree we should use `EtcdCopyBackupTask`

While this approach ensures that only valid snapshots are re-uploaded, it is **resource-intensive**, requiring an operational etcd instance even in hibernation. Given the high cost in terms of compute and memory, the authors **recommend** the snapshot re-upload approach as a more practical solution.

##### Etcd CR API Changes

A new field is introduced in `Etcd.spec.backup.store` to indicate the immutability strategy:

```go
// StoreSpec defines parameters for storing etcd backups.
type StoreSpec struct {
    // ...
    // Immutability configuration for the backup store.
    Immutability *ImmutabilitySpec `json:"immutability,omitempty"`
}

// ImmutabilitySpec defines immutability settings.
type ImmutabilitySpec struct {
    // RetentionType indicates the type of immutability approach. For example, "bucket".
    RetentionType string `json:"retentionType,omitempty"`
}
```

If `immutability` is not specified, `etcd-druid` will assume that the bucket is mutable, and no immutability-related logic applies. We have defined a new type to allow us future enhancements to the immutability specification.

##### `etcd-backup-restore` Enhancements

> The authors propose adding new commands to the `etcd-backup-restore` CLI (`etcdbrctl`) to maintain immutability during hibernation and to clean up snapshots created by `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The authors propose adding new sub-command to the `etcd-backup-restore` CLI (`etcdbrctl`) to maintain immutability during hibernation and to clean up snapshots created by `ExtendFullSnapshotImmutabilityTask`:
```

  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Operational Considerations](#operational-considerations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Object-Level Immutability Policies vs. Bucket-Level Immutability Policies](#object-level-immutability-policies-vs-bucket-level-immutability-policies)
      - [Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers](#feasibility-study-immutable-backups-on-cloud-providers)
      - [Considerations for Object-Level Immutability](#considerations-for-object-level-immutability)
      - [Conclusion](#conclusion)
        - [Comparison of Storage Provider Properties for Bucket-Level and Object-Level Immutability](#comparison-of-storage-provider-properties-for-bucket-level-and-object-level-immutability)
  - [References](#references)
  - [Glossary](#glossary)

## Summary

This proposal aims to enhance the reliability and integrity of ETCD backups in ETCD Druid by introducing immutable backups. By leveraging cloud provider features that support a write-once-read-many (WORM) model, this approach prevents unauthorized modifications to backup data, ensuring that backups remain available and intact for restoration.

## Motivation

> Ensuring the integrity and availability of ETCD backups is crucial for the ability to restore an ETCD cluster after it has irrecoverably gone down. Making backups immutable, protects against unintended or malicious modifications post-creation, thereby enhancing the overall security posture.

Reviewer 3: Changed in the latest commit.

### Goals

- Implement immutable backup support for ETCD clusters.
- Secure backup data against unintended or unauthorized modifications after creation.

> - Ensure backups are consistently available and intact for restoration purposes.

Reviewer 3: Other points also don't make too much sense. Only the second point is a goal. Implementing immutable backup support is a way to achieve the goal.
Only keeping point 2.

### Non-Goals

> - Altering existing backup processes beyond what's necessary for immutability.

Reviewer 3: Already removed.

- Implementing object-level immutability policies at this stage.
- Supporting immutable backups on storage providers that do not offer immutability features (e.g., OpenStack Swift).

## Proposal

### Overview

> Introduce immutability in backup storage by leveraging cloud provider features that support a write-once-read-many (WORM) model. This will prevent data alterations after backup creation, enhancing data integrity and security. The implementation will focus on bucket-level immutability policies, as they are widely supported and easier to manage across different cloud providers.

Reviewer 3: Present in the current dock.

### Detailed Design

> #### Bucket Immutability Mechanism

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### Configuring Immutable Buckets
```

- **Supported by Major Providers:**
  - **Google Cloud Storage (GCS):** [Bucket Lock](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
  - **Amazon S3 (S3):** [Object Lock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)
  - **Azure Blob Storage (ABS):** [Immutable Blob Storage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-policy-configure-container-scope?tabs=azure-portal)

- **Not Supported:**
  - **OpenStack Swift**

**Implementation Details:**

- Operators are responsible for creating or updating buckets with these immutability settings before ETCD Druid starts uploading snapshots.
- Once the bucket is configured to be immutable, snapshots uploaded by `etcd-backup-restore` are also immutable and cannot be altered or deleted until the immutability period expires.
- No additional configuration needs to be passed to etcd-druid.

#### ETCD Backup Configuration

> Operators need to ensure that the ETCD backup configuration aligns with the immutability requirements. This includes setting appropriate immutability periods.

Reviewer 5: Can we add a best practice here. Also I believe we have some defaults for garbage collection, so should that be aligned here as well as a guidance?

Reviewer 3: Consumers should not be expected to read the proposal to find defaults. The right place for this is normal documentation.

#### Handling of Hibernated Clusters

> In scenarios where an ETCD cluster has been hibernated (scaled down to zero replicas) for a duration that exceeds the immutability period, backups may become mutable again (behaviour depends on cloud provider [refer](#comparison-of-storage-provider-properties-for-bucket-level-and-object-level-immutability)), compromising the intended immutability guarantees.

Reviewer 5: We hibernate shoot clusters and not ETCD cluster. 
So I should we rather state that, If you are using ETCD-Druid with Gardener and are consuming Gardener feature of Shoot Hibernation then we need to explicitly handle hibernated clusters. 

We can also mention the behavior and expectation of standalone (without Gardener) usage of etcd-druid and how similar behavior can be achieved.

Reviewer 3: We now state that an etcd cluster can now be "hibernated", and the following is meant by hibernation:

When an etcd cluster is intended to be scaled in and stopped from serving traffic, **the spec of the etcd can be changed** to have a field `hibernated: true`. 
etcd-druid ensures that the necessary backups have been taken, and scales-in the cluster. 
When the spec has `hibernated: true` removed, or set to `hibernated: false`, the next reconciliation will recover the etcd cluster from the backups.

The following are the implications:

- Consuming Gardener: When a shoot cluster is hibernated, then the corresponding etcd cluster is also hibernated by etcd-druid.
- Standalone: When an etcd cluster is to be hibernated, the spec of the etcd is to be changed by an operator.

   - **Global Impact on All Objects:** Since bucket-level immutability settings apply to all objects within the bucket, extending the immutability period would affect not only the existing snapshots but also all future snapshots uploaded to the bucket.
   - **Increased Storage Costs:** Prolonging the immutability period means that snapshots cannot be deleted or modified until the extended period expires. This leads to the accumulation of old backups, consuming more storage space and significantly driving up storage costs over time.
   - **Inefficient Resource Utilization:** Retaining all snapshots for a longer period than necessary is an inefficient use of storage resources, especially when only the latest snapshots are typically needed for restoration purposes.

   Given these considerable disadvantages, extending the bucket-level immutability period is impractical for maintaining the immutability of snapshots during extended hibernation periods.

2. **Take a New Snapshot**

   By creating a new snapshot, immutability is retained for the new snapshot without affecting the immutability settings of the entire bucket or other snapshots.

>    Approach 2 is feasible and can be achieved in two ways:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   This can achieved in two ways:
```

We are already inside the second bullet point.

Reviewer 3: Outdated.

   - **Option A:** Bring the ETCD cluster back up by increasing the replicas, take a snapshot, and then hibernate the ETCD by setting the replicas back to zero **without the operator's intention**.
     - **Challenges:**
       - **Unintended State Changes:** Increasing the ETCD replicas to bring the cluster back up modifies the cluster's state without the operator's explicit intention, which could lead to unexpected behavior or conflicts with operational policies.
       - **Operational Overhead:** Automating the process of scaling the ETCD cluster up and down adds complexity and potential risks, especially if the scaling operations interfere with other scheduled tasks or maintenance windows.

>    - **Option B:** Start an embedded ETCD instance and take a snapshot.

Reviewer 3: This is outdated now. Resolving.

     - **Advantages:**
       - **Respects Operator Intentions:** Does not alter the state of the actual ETCD cluster, keeping it in hibernation as intended by the operator.
       - **No Impact on Existing Setup:** Avoids modifying the ETCD cluster's replicas, preventing any unintended consequences.
       - **Automated Process:** Can be integrated into existing maintenance jobs without manual intervention.

**Proposed Solution:**

*Option B is recommended* because it respects the operator's intention to keep the ETCD cluster hibernated and avoids the complexities and risks associated with modifying the cluster's state.

> Leverage the compaction job to take fresh snapshots periodically during hibernation. This ensures that:

Reviewer 5: We are introducing compaction job here for the first time, so may a reference or link to understand what is a compaction job.

Also, I was wondering aren't we overloading the compaction job here, should be create a new job which deploys compaction controller code path but is specific for taking snapshots for hibernated clusters. It will also help in differentiation of errors with regular compaction job.

- **Storage Costs are Controlled:** Avoids unnecessary extension of immutability for all snapshots, preventing increased storage costs.

### New Compaction Controller Flag

**Flag:** `--hibernation-snapshot-interval`

- **Type:** Duration
- **Default:** `24h`
- **Description:** This flag sets the period after which a compaction job should be triggered for a hibernated ETCD cluster, based on the time since the last renewal of the full snapshot lease. If the time since `fullLease.Spec.RenewTime.Time` exceeds the duration specified by this flag, and `etcd.spec.replicas` is `0` (indicating hibernation), the compaction job will automatically trigger to create a new snapshot. This approach ensures that backups remain within the immutability period and are safeguarded against becoming mutable.

### Garbage Collection during Compaction for Hibernated ETCD Clusters

If an ETCD cluster is hibernated for a long duration, there is a chance that backup storage will accumulate a large number of snapshots. Since the ETCD cluster is not running, the `etcd-backup-restore` component is also not running to perform garbage collection of the snapshots.

> To address this, the compaction job should be enhanced to handle garbage collection during hibernation. This ensures that old snapshots are cleaned up appropriately, considering the immutability constraints.

Reviewer 5: will this be done during regular compaction job or with the one created for hibernated clusters. Again because the word compaction is overloaded as we will not be compacting anything for hibernated clusters except taking a full snapshot again.

Reviewer 3: A separate command will be introduced in etcd-backup-restore for garbage collection.

This will be added to the compaction job approach.

### Excluding Snapshots Under Specific Circumstances

> Given that immutable backups cannot be deleted until the immutability period expires, there are scenarios, such as corrupted snapshots or other anomalies, where certain snapshots must be skipped during the restoration process. To facilitate this:

Reviewer 5: This can happen even outside of immutable backups scenarios as well, so how is this handled there? I'm guessing currently by deleting manually the affected snapshots. 
But with this new approach it should be same mechanism there as well.

Reviewer 3: If snapshots are mutable, this is achieved through deletion of snapshots.
The same functionality will be achieved through custom metadata tags. Will enhance the doc for this.

> - **Custom Metadata Tags:** Utilize custom metadata to mark specific objects (snapshots) that should be bypassed. To exclude a snapshot from the restoration process, attach custom metadata to it with the key `x-etcd-snapshot-exclude` and value `true`. This method is officially supported, as demonstrated in the [etcd-backup-restore PR](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/pull/776).

Reviewer 5: Its not clear from the doc who takes care of attaching the custom metadata flag and how its consumed? Can we describe here to avoid any unintended interpretation of the flow.

Reviewer 3: Human operators add these tags; will include this.

## Compatibility

The proposed changes are fully compatible with existing ETCD clusters and backup processes. Operators are responsible for creating or updating the immutability settings on the backup storage buckets, but no changes are required to the ETCD clusters themselves.

- **Backward Compatibility:** Existing clusters without immutable buckets will continue to function without change.
- **Forward Compatibility:** Clusters can opt-in to use immutable backups by configuring the bucket accordingly.

## Implementation Steps

> 1. **Enhance the Compaction Job:**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. **Enhance the Trigger of Compaction Job:**
```
IMO, We are not going to enhance compaction job, we are just to going to enhance trigger point of compaction job.
Right now, creation of compaction job calculates the difference b/w delta and full snapshot events using lease holder Identity, all we need to do is add one more condition for hibernated shoot ( using lease update time + flag which you mentioned: hibernation-snapshot-interval )

> 1. **Enhance the Compaction Job:**

Reviewer 5: I think we should create a new name for the job for Hibernated Full Snapshots and ensure that we have flags and even flow which can leverage the existing compaction feature and enhance it with additional change required for Immuatable backup snapshotting and garbage collection. 

Also we cannot have a compaction job for hibernated cluster in practical terms, so it will be even more confusing to see a compaction job running for a hibernated cluster.

>      - Modify the compaction job in `etcd-backup-restore` to manage backup processes for hibernated clusters, including snapshot creation and garbage collection, while considering the new immutability constraints.

Reviewer 4: > Modify the compaction job in `etcd-backup-restore` to manage backup processes for hibernated clusters

snapshot compaction job won't distinguish b/w running cluster or hibernated cluster, so this statement doesn't make sense to me. All we need to handle is to how to trigger the compaction job for hibernated clusters but nothing changes for compact sub-command.

> including snapshot creation and garbage collection, while considering the new immutability constraints.

didn't get it, creation/upload of snapshot by compaction will remain unchange. Moreover, how's garbage collection coming into the picture of compaction job, I didn't get this part as well.

Reviewer 3: This is outdated now, resolving.

>      - Implement the `--hibernation-snapshot-interval` flag in the compaction controller. Ensure that the compaction job can start an embedded ETCD instance to take snapshots during hibernation.

Reviewer 4: >  Ensure that the compaction job can start an embedded ETCD instance to take snapshots during hibernation.

again this statement doesn't make sense, as I mentioned in above comment snapshot compaction is independent of running/hibernated cluster.

Reviewer 3: Outdated. Resolving..

> 

Reviewer 3: A subcommand for etcd-backup-restore to perform GC is planned now.

- **Increased Storage Costs:**

  - **Risk:** Introducing immutability could lead to increased storage costs due to the inability to delete backups before the immutability period ends.
  - **Mitigation:** Operators should carefully configure immutability periods and monitor storage utilization. Garbage collection will help mitigate long-term storage growth.

- **Backup Gaps During Hibernation:**

  - **Risk:** Hibernated clusters might not receive necessary backups, potentially leading to compliance issues.
  - **Mitigation:** The compaction job's enhancement ensures that backups are taken during hibernation at configured intervals.

- **Excluding Critical Snapshots:**

  - **Risk:** Excluding snapshots during restoration might be misused or lead to incomplete data restoration.
  - **Mitigation:** Restrict the ability to tag snapshots for exclusion to authorized personnel. Implement audit logging for actions that tag snapshots.

## Operational Considerations

Operators need to:

- **Bucket Configuration:**

  - Configure buckets with appropriate immutability settings before deploying ETCD clusters.
  - Ensure that the immutability periods align with organizational policies.

> - **Compaction Job Configuration:**

Reviewer 5: What is the retry threshold for this job? 
What happens if it fails to run for a period of 24hrs. 
What happens if druid is down?
What happens when druid comes back up esp. for failed jobs which have breached the retry threshold? 
What happens if we breach the bucket retention period? Is no data to restore possible on wake-up of hibernated clusters. 
Does garbage collection runs independent or in sequence only after the job takes a full snapshot on its run.

#### Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers

Major cloud storage providers such as Google Cloud Storage (GCS), Amazon S3, and Azure Blob Storage (ABS) support both bucket-level and object-level immutability mechanisms to enforce data immutability.

1. **Bucket-Level Immutability Policies:**

     - **Applies Uniformly:** Applies a uniform immutability period to all objects within a bucket.
     - **Immutable Objects:** Once set, objects cannot be modified or deleted until the immutability period expires.
     - **Simplified Management:** Simplifies management by applying the same policy to all objects.

2. **Object-Level Immutability Policies:**

     - **Granular Control:** Allows setting immutability periods on a per-object basis.
     - **Flexible Immutability Durations:** Offers granular control, enabling different immutability durations for individual objects.
     - **Varying Requirements:** Can accommodate varying immutability requirements for different types of backups.

> #### Considerations for Object-Level Immutability

Reviewer 5: We should link this in the Overview as an alternate which was considered and can be read here, but there we only talk about our choosen approch.

Reviewer 3: Outdated. This is already present.

Given these considerations, we propose starting with bucket-level immutability to achieve immediate enhancement of backup immutability with minimal changes to existing processes. This approach allows us to implement immutability features across all providers consistently.

Once provider support for object-level immutability on existing buckets improves and operational complexities are addressed, we can consider adopting object-level immutability in the future to address specific requirements, such as varying immutability periods for different backups.

These are the reasons why we are initially opting for bucket-level immutability, with the possibility of transitioning to object-level immutability when it becomes more feasible.

##### Comparison of Storage Provider Properties for Bucket-Level and Object-Level Immutability

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

---

> title: Immutable ETCD Backups

Reviewer 3: Yes. I've already started doing so. I've been a proponent of this since the start.

For future reference, could you link the resource where you read these guidelines for me and the other maintainers as well? Thanks.

- Implement changes required in `etcd-backup-restore` and `etcd-druid` to support this proposal.

### Non-Goals

- Implementing object-level immutability policies at this stage.
- Supporting immutable backups on storage providers that do not offer immutability features (e.g., OpenStack Swift).

## Proposal

### Overview

We propose introducing immutability in backup storage by leveraging cloud provider features that support a write-once-read-many (WORM) model. This approach will prevent data alterations post-creation, enhancing data integrity and security.

There are two types of immutability options to consider:

1. **Bucket-Level Immutability:** Applies a uniform immutability period to all objects within a bucket. This is widely supported and easier to manage across different cloud providers.
2. **Object-Level Immutability:** Allows setting immutability periods on a per-object basis, offering more granular control but with increased complexity and varying support across providers.

In the detailed design, we will focus on bucket-level immutability policies due to their broader support and simpler management.

### Detailed Design

#### Bucket Immutability Mechanism

> The bucket immutability feature configures an immutability policy for a cloud storage bucket, dictating how long objects in the bucket must remain immutable. It also allows for locking the bucket's immutability policy, permanently preventing the policy from being reduced or removed.

Reviewer 3: Unfortunately this would not be accurate. Cloud providers like Google Cloud Storage, and Azure Blob Storage **explicitly allow increasing** the immutability policy duration, even when the bucket is locked.

Consumers can always increase this duration if the duration they set in the beginning is not sufficient.

- **Supported by Major Providers:**
  - **Google Cloud Storage (GCS):** [Bucket Lock](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
  - **Amazon S3 (S3):** [Object Lock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)
  - **Azure Blob Storage (ABS):** [Immutable Blob Storage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-policy-configure-container-scope?tabs=azure-portal)

- **Not Supported:**
  - **OpenStack Swift**

**Implementation Details:**

- Operators are responsible for configuring new or existing buckets with these immutability settings before `etcd-backup-restore` begins uploading snapshots.
- Once configured, snapshots uploaded by `etcd-backup-restore` will also be immutable and cannot be altered or deleted until the immutability period expires.
- No additional configuration needs to be passed to etcd-druid.

#### ETCD Backup Configuration

> Operators must ensure that the ETCD backup configuration aligns with the immutability requirements, including setting appropriate immutability periods.

Reviewer 3: The intent was to talk about configuration related to etcd-backup-restore regarding snapshot schedules, snapshot garbage collection, and so on.

The next commit will have this section revamped.

> Operators must ensure that the ETCD backup configuration aligns with the immutability requirements, including setting appropriate immutability periods.

Author: Yes, we have referred to the links for configuring immutable backup buckets for both standalone and Gardener cases. We have removed the compaction approach since both the compaction and re-uploading approaches use the operator framework and take full snapshots in the same way. The only difference is starting the embedded `etcd`. The more appropriate approach is re-uploading. Therefore, we have removed the compaction approach as it is redundant, doing the same thing apart from starting the embedded `etcd` and compacting.

> Operators must ensure that the ETCD backup configuration aligns with the immutability requirements, including setting appropriate immutability periods.

Author: Section clubbed with `Configuring Immutable Backups`

#### Handling of Hibernated Clusters

> When an ETCD cluster is hibernated for a duration exceeding the immutability period, backups may become mutable again (this behavior depends on the cloud provider; refer to [Comparison of Storage Provider Properties](#comparison-of-storage-provider-properties-for-bucket-level-and-object-level-immutability)), compromising the intended immutability guarantees.

Reviewer 3: Yes. Behavior after expiry of objects behaves on the cloud provider.

> Such handling of hibernated clusters is the type of scenario which the etcd operator-tasks frameworks lends itself to quite well, and thus for all proposed solutions, the operator tasks framework as defined [here](./05-etcd-operator-tasks.md) will be made use of for the designs of the solutions.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Such handling of hibernated clusters is the type of scenario which the etcd operator-tasks frameworks lends itself to quite well, and thus for all proposed solutions, the operator tasks framework as defined [here](./05-etcd-operator-tasks.md) will be made use of for the design of the solution.
```

To maintain snapshot immutability during extended hibernation, we propose two approaches:

##### Approach 1: Using the Compaction Job

**Proposed Solution:**

> Utilize the compaction job to periodically take fresh snapshots during hibernation. Introduce a new flag `--hibernation-snapshot-interval` to the compaction controller. This flag sets the interval after which a compaction job should be triggered for a hibernated ETCD cluster, based on the time elapsed since `fullLease.Spec.RenewTime.Time` and if `etcd.spec.replicas` is `0` (indicating hibernation). The compaction job uses the [compact command](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/cmd/compact.go) to create a new snapshot.

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be a derived information, based on the last full snapshot time and the etcd.spec.replicas being `0`. 
We already have this information so why not use that.

Author: We have removed the compaction approach as mentioned [here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1871190971). 

Anyways, controller periodically creates the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutabilityTask` if `etcd.spec.backup.store.immutability.retentionType` is set to `"Bucket"` and based on `etcd.spec.backup.fullSnapshotSchedule`.

> Utilize the compaction job to periodically take fresh snapshots during hibernation. Introduce a new flag `--hibernation-snapshot-interval` to the compaction controller. This flag sets the interval after which a compaction job should be triggered for a hibernated ETCD cluster, based on the time elapsed since `fullLease.Spec.RenewTime.Time` and if `etcd.spec.replicas` is `0` (indicating hibernation). The compaction job uses the [compact command](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/cmd/compact.go) to create a new snapshot.

Author: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1871190971

**Implementation Details:**

- **Etcd Druid:**
  - **Compaction Controller:**
    - Introduce a new flag:
      - **Flag:** `--hibernation-snapshot-interval`
        - **Type:** Duration

>         - **Default:** `24h`

Reviewer 5: If someone sets this value to more than 24h lets say sets it to 72h, won't this already break the contract of immutability. I think we should not expose this internal detail as a config, unless you have a case at hand where this is required.

Reviewer 3: It's the responsibility of the operator that sets up etcd-druid to configure this flag correctly.
For example, if the bucket is configured to be immutable for 15 days, then the operator wanting to trigger snapshots every 3 days is fine, a new snapshot every day is unnecessary so this can be left configurable, in my opinion.

        - **Description:** Interval after which a new snapshot is taken during hibernation.
    - The compaction job starts an embedded ETCD instance to take snapshots during hibernation.
    - This approach ensures that backups remain within the immutability period and are safeguarded against becoming mutable.

###### Advantages

- **No Change to ETCD Cluster State:** Does not alter the actual ETCD cluster, keeping it in hibernation.
- **Automated Snapshot Creation:** Periodically creates new snapshots to extend immutability by triggering the compaction job.
- **Leverages Existing Mechanism:** Utilizes the compaction job, which is already part of the system.

###### Disadvantages

- **Resource Consumption:** Starting an embedded ETCD instance periodically consumes resources.

> ##### Approach 2: Re-upload of the latest snapshot

Reviewer 5: We call this approach -- `Re-upload of the latest snapshot` while in conclusion section we have called this approach `Copy backup task`. Can we have one naming convention for the approach.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, this was a miss while renaming the approach to "re-upload of the latest"

**Proposed Solution:**

> A new `EtcdOperatorTask` called `EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` will be created as defined in the operator tasks framework. This new `EtcdOperatorTask` extends the immutability period by deploying a job which uploads another copy of the latest snapshot to the object store.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A new `EtcdOperatorTask` called `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutability` will be created as defined in the operator tasks framework. This new `EtcdOperatorTask` extends the immutability period by deploying a job which uploads another copy of the latest snapshot to the object store.
```
I think `extension` is an overloaded term in Gardener context and can be confusing. Also as its a verb it should highlight the action.

Reviewer 3: Yeah you're right. The suggested name is better.

> A full snapshot is taken before hibernating the ETCD cluster. This is to ensure that no state maintained in the etcd cluster is lost before hibernation.

Author: Since a full snapshot is triggered before hibernation, then compaction job approach is redundant. We have decided to remove it as mentioned https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1871190971

**Implementation Details:**

> - **Introduce the `extend-immutability` command to etcdbrctl**:

Author: I liked your idea of naming it `renew-snapshot`. This has been addressed in commit 57e91a04db82a8e1645393c3ecfef5a2ab8f75a6.

  - etcd-backup-restore will be enhanced to support a new command `extend-immutability` which does the following:
    - Downloads the latest full snapshot from the object store.
    - Replaces the Unix epoch in the file-name of the downloaded snapshot to contain the time at which the file completes downloading.
    - Uploads this newly renamed snapshot to the same object store.
    - Renews the full snapshot lease after the upload is successful.

    The immutability period of an object begins from the moment of upload, thus extending the immutability period of the latest snapshot. Renaming the snapshot is necessary since the downloaded snapshot can not simply be re-uploaded as uploading with the same name would be an attempt at modifying an already existing snapshot, which is disallowed.

    This command could either be implemented standalone, or could be implemented as a wrapper over the `copy` command of `etcdbrctl` by extending the functionality of the `copy` command accordingly.
- **Introduce the `garbage-collect` command to etcdbrctl**:
  - etcd-backup-restore will be enhanced to support a new command `garbage-collect` which does the following:

>     - Perform garbage collection of the snapshots in the object store according to the policy specified with the `--garbage-collection-policy` flag.  

Reviewer 5: What are different `--garbage-collection-policy` values and when to use what?

>     This functionality is needed since it would be necessary to garbage collect the (identical final) snapshots that are (re)uploaded in order to ensure that there is always a snapshot which is immutable.

Author: This has been addressed in commit 57e91a04db82a8e1645393c3ecfef5a2ab8f75a6.

- **Update `Etcd` CRD:**
  - Add `etcd.spec.hibernation`:  

>     Since there are situations outside of hibernation where the number of replicas of the statefulset would have to be scaled to zero, there needs to be an explicit way in which it is conveyed to etcd-druid that the etcd cluster is being hibernated. This can be achieved by extending the `Etcd` CRD by including a new field in the `spec` called `hibernated`.

Reviewer 5: It is not clear how will the controller will adopt the existing `ETCD` resources which have a hibernation schedule already in place, esp. in the context of Gardener usage.

Author: We have removed the section hibernation (`support for specifying an intent for hibernation`) as a non goal, since this will be handled with different DEP gardener/etcd-druid#922.

>     Since there are situations outside of hibernation where the number of replicas of the statefulset would have to be scaled to zero, there needs to be an explicit way in which it is conveyed to etcd-druid that the etcd cluster is being hibernated. This can be achieved by extending the `Etcd` CRD by including a new field in the `spec` called `hibernated`.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for your review. Will do this.

>     Since there are situations outside of hibernation where the number of replicas of the statefulset would have to be scaled to zero, there needs to be an explicit way in which it is conveyed to etcd-druid that the etcd cluster is being hibernated. This can be achieved by extending the `Etcd` CRD by including a new field in the `spec` called `hibernated`.

Author: Yes, we have removed the section hibernation (`support for specifying an intent for hibernation`) as a non goal, since this will be handled with different DEP gardener/etcd-druid#922.

    ```yaml
    hibernation:
      enabled: <bool>
    ```

  - Add `etcd.status.hibernatedAt`:  
    This field conveys information about whether the cluster has been successfully hibernated after a reconciliation, and the time at which it entered hibernation. This field is cleared when the cluster is woken up from hibernation.

    ```yaml
    hibernatedAt: <hibernation-time>
    ```

>   - Add `immutableSettings.retentionType` under `etcd.spec.backup.store`.

Author: > Also, if we're keeping this field, I would rename it to immutabilitySettings. The term immutableSettings actually means making the settings itself immutable, rather than talking about the settings related to immutability.

I have renamed `immutabilitySettings ` as `immutability` to be consistent as requested in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866#issuecomment-2481911583

- **ETCD Controller Logic:**
  - When hibernation is requested, by changing `etcd.spec.hibernated.enabled` to `true`:

>     - The controller removes the ETCD client ports `2380` and `2379` from the `etcd-client` service, leaving only the etcd-backup-restore port `8080`. This stops ETCD client traffic.

Author: Yes, I agree this is not scope of this DEP. So we have remove the section as mentioned https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1871190971

    - The controller creates a `EtcdOperatorTask` to trigger an on-demand full snapshot.

>       - On-demand full snapshot is successful: the controller does no additional handling.

Author: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1871190971

      - On-demand full snapshot fails: the controller triggers the creation of a `EtcdOperatorTask` for an on-demand compaction job that compacts the latest base full snapshot and the corresponding deltas.
    - The controller scales in the ETCD cluster (i.e., sets `StatefulSet.spec.replicas` to zero).
    - The controller creates the `EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` periodically if `etcd.spec.backup.store.immutableSettings.retentionType` is set to `"Bucket"`.

> - **`EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` specification:**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **`ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutability` specification:**
```

Author: Addressed

  - Run `etcdbrctl extend-immutability --bucket-level-immutability` to extend the immutability of the latest snapshot.

>   - Run `etcdbrctl garbage-collect --garbage-collection-policy <garbage-collection-policy>` to garbage collect the snapshots that are created during the extension.

Author: Addressed

- **EtcdOperatorTask Controller Logic:**

>   - The operator-tasks controller will react to the creation of the custom resource, and will deploy a job named `<etcd-name>-extend-immutability` which is the `EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` job.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - The operator-tasks controller will react to the creation of the custom resource, and will deploy a job named `<etcd-name>-extend-immutability` which is the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutability` job.
```

Author: Addressed

  - The controller also reports metrics regarding the `EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` job, which can be used to raise alerts for operators that immutability has not been extended.

###### Advantages

- **Minimal Operational Impact:** Does not alter the ETCD cluster's state during hibernation and respects the operator's intention to hibernate the cluster without unintended changes.
- **Efficient Resource Utilization:** Only the latest snapshot is copied, limiting additional storage usage, and avoids the need to start an embedded ETCD instance.
- **Automated Process:** The process of taking a full snapshot before hibernation and creating the `EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` is automated within the controller.

###### Disadvantages

> - **Additional Complexity:** Requires updates to the etcd controller, introduction of the operator-tasks controller, and introduction of new etcdbrctl commands.

Reviewer 5: Why do we see this as additional complexity, weren't we planning to anyways implement an operator-task controller?

Reviewer 3: Additional complexity since it is a hard prerequisite; but you are right. This is the only way forward; will remove this.

- **Prerequisite Requirement:** Relies on successfully taking a full snapshot before hibernation, which may introduce delays or require handling snapshot failures.

##### Recommendation

After evaluating both approaches, **Approach 2: Re-upload of the latest snapshot** is recommended due to its minimal operational impact and efficient resource utilization. By ensuring that a full snapshot is taken before hibernation, we maintain data consistency and extend the immutability period effectively. This approach respects the operator's intention to keep the ETCD cluster hibernated without introducing significant resource consumption or complexity.

## Compatibility

The proposed changes are fully compatible with existing ETCD clusters and backup processes.

- **Backward Compatibility:**
  - Existing clusters without immutable buckets will continue to function without change.

>   - The introduction of the `EtcdSnapshotImmutabilityExtension` does not affect clusters that are not hibernated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - The introduction of the `ExtendEtcdSnapshotImmutability` does not affect clusters that are not hibernated.
```

Author: Addressed

> - **Forward Compatibility:**

Reviewer 3: > Can you also talk about any repercussions if immutability is switched on in the bucket, but the relevant settings are not updated in the Etcd spec or etcd-backup-restore processes?

etcd-backup-restore's immutability handling is designed (currently) to be agnostic to the configuration provided to it at startup. It should be able to handle such transient changes during runtime without any issues; as it checks if it can delete a specific object before doing so. If it tries deleting an object and it errors specifically with an error code that corresponds to the attempt to delete an object that is immutable, it handles this error gracefully and skips deletion of that snapshot in that particular garbage collection run.

> For instance, the current garbage collection will start throwing errors.

As explained above, it will not.

> Is etcdbr equipped to handle those?

Yes.

> Should garbage collection skip an object if it is immutable?

It already does.

> I think that might be a prerequisite before turning on immutability on the bucket, don't you think?

As the error handling for immutable snapshots is already present in etcd-backup-restore as of https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/releases/tag/v0.32.0, it is safe to switch these settings already.

  - Clusters can opt-in to use immutable backups by configuring the bucket accordingly.
  - The controller's logic to handle hibernation is additive and does not interfere with existing workflows.

## Risks and Mitigations

- **Increased Storage Costs:**

  - **Risk:** Copying snapshots or frequent snapshots may lead to increased storage usage.
  - **Mitigation:** Since only the latest full snapshot is copied in Approach 2, the additional storage usage is minimal. Garbage collection helps manage storage utilization.

- **Operational Complexity:**

  - **Risk:** Introducing new resources and processes might add complexity.
  - **Mitigation:** The processes are automated within the controller, requiring minimal operator intervention. Clear documentation and tooling support will help manage complexity.

- **Failed Snapshot Before Hibernation:**

  - **Risk:** Failure to take a full snapshot before hibernation could delay the hibernation process.

>   - **Mitigation:** Implement robust error handling and retries. Notify operators of failures to take corrective action.

Author: > What is the behavior if full snapshot fails after repeated retries? Will this infinitely block etcd cluster scale-down?

Yes.

- **Failed Operations:**

  - **Risk:** Errors during copy or snapshot operations could lead to incomplete backups.
  - **Mitigation:** Implement robust error handling and retries in the copier and compaction job logic. Ensure proper logging and alerting.

## Operational Considerations

Operators need to:

- **Configure Buckets:**

  - Set up buckets with appropriate immutability settings before deploying ETCD clusters.
  - Ensure immutability periods align with organizational policies.

- **Monitor Hibernation Processes:**

  - Keep track of hibernated clusters and ensure that full snapshots are taken before hibernation.
  - Verify that `EtcdCopyBackupsTask` resources are created and executed as expected.

- **Review Retention Policies:**

>   - Set `maxBackups` and `maxBackupAge` in the `EtcdCopyBackupsTask` to manage storage utilization effectively.

Author: As mentioned https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/884#discussion_r1871221306, we are not going to use copy command.

#### Feasibility Study: Immutable Backups on Cloud Providers

Major cloud storage providers such as Google Cloud Storage (GCS), Amazon S3, and Azure Blob Storage (ABS) support both bucket-level and object-level immutability mechanisms to enforce data immutability.

1. **Bucket-Level Immutability Policies:**

   - **Applies Uniformly:** Applies a uniform immutability period to all objects within a bucket.
   - **Immutable Objects:** Once set, objects cannot be modified or deleted until the immutability period expires.
   - **Simplified Management:** Simplifies management by applying the same policy to all objects.

2. **Object-Level Immutability Policies:**

   - **Granular Control:** Allows setting immutability periods on a per-object basis.
   - **Flexible Immutability Durations:** Offers granular control, enabling different immutability durations for individual objects.
   - **Varying Requirements:** Can accommodate varying immutability requirements for different types of backups.

#### Considerations for Object-Level Immutability

> Using object-level immutability provides flexibility in scenarios where certain backups require different immutability periods. However, current limitations and complexities make it less practical for immediate implementation.

Reviewer: with object-level immutability all you need is to extend the immutability for the latest full snapshot. You do not really need to copy the full snapshot which is currently a hacky solution put in place because we are not going directly to object-level immutability policy.

| Can object-level immutability period be decreased?                        | No  | No  | No                            |
| Support for enabling object-level immutability in existing buckets        | No  | Yes | Yes                           |
| Support for enabling object-level immutability in new buckets             | Yes | Yes | Yes                           |
| Precedence between bucket-level and object-level immutability periods     | Max(bucket, object)| Object-level| Max(bucket, object) |

> **Note:** *In AWS S3, changes to the bucket-level immutability period can be blocked by adding a specific bucket policy.

---

## References

- [GCS Bucket Lock](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/bucket-lock)
- [AWS S3 Object Lock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/object-lock.html)
- [Azure Immutable Blob Storage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/immutable-policy-configure-container-scope?tabs=azure-portal)
- [etcd-backup-restore PR #776](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/pull/776)
- [EtcdCopyBackupsTask Implementation](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/544)

> ## Glossary

Author: We have moved and rename to terminology after `Summary` section.
